docs/modules/ROOT/pages/explanations/metered_billing.adoc, before:

= Metered Billing
:page_audience: vshneer

include::partial$audience-hint.adoc[]

This document describes how Puppet Managed Services report data to Odoo for service billing based on the measured usage.

More information regarding the metered billing at VSHN can be found at https://docs.central.vshn.ch/metered-billing.html[docs.central.vshn.ch^].

== Summary

The metered usage is leveraging the existing PuppetDB to determine billed services and components. Puppet profiles instantiate a defined resource type https://git.vshn.net/vshn-puppet/puppet-billing[Billing^] which defines what unit and Odoo product ID should be used and to which sales order the usage of a specifc service should be reported.

The https://git.vshn.net/vshn-puppet/odoo-metered-billing-reporting[Puppet-Odoo metered billing reporting^] will periodically query the PuppetDB for all `Billing` resources and submit them to VSHN central's https://docs.central.vshn.ch/metered-billing-data-ingestion.html[usage data ingestion endpoint^]

=== Enable metered billing in a Puppet profile

To enable metered billing for a Puppet profile, that profile needs to define a billing resource:

[source,puppet]
--
profile_example (
    ...,
    Billing::Options  $billing_custom_options = {},
    Optional[Boolean] $billing_reporting = undef,
    Optional[String]  $billing_sales_order_id = undef,
    ...,
){

  if $billing_reporting or $billing_reporting =~ Undef {
    billing { "${trusted['certname']}-${title}":
      product_id     => 'managed-service-...',
      reporting      => $billing_reporting,
      sales_order_id => $billing_sales_order_id,
      *              => $billing_custom_options,
    }
  }

}
--

[NOTE]
====
- Implement all parameters as outlined above including their default values. This ensures an unified interface across all puppet profiles.
- Set the `product_id` to the corresponding `Metered Billing ID` of the product in https://central.vshn.ch/[Odoo]
====

=== Set billing information in Hiera

For a resource to be processed in the metered billing, it needs to know to what sales order it should be reported. The `sales_order_id` needs to be configured in hiera:

[source,yaml]
--
billing::sales_order_id: 'Sxxxxx'
--

Alternatively, if different profiles should report to different sales orders, the `sales_order_id` may be overridden on a per-profile basis:

[source,yaml]
--
billing::sales_order_id: 'Syyyyy'
profile_specialservice::billing_sales_order_id: 'Szzzzz'
--

[NOTE]
====
Check with https://handbook.vshn.ch/domain_sales_account_management.html[Sales & Account Management^] for the correct sales order to use for a specific project/service
====

=== Disable metered billing in Hiera

Metered billing can be disabled for a specific profile or for a specific server or project in hiera

[source,yaml]
--
# disable billing for all services
billing::reporting: false

# disable for a specific profile
profile_specialservice::billing_reporting: false
--

== Deployment

The reporting is deployed using the https://git.vshn.net/vshn-puppet/puppet-billing/-/blob/master/manifests/reporting.pp[billing::reporting^] profile, multiple instances (f.e. one per Odoo environment) can be deployed in parallel.
Currently the billing reporting is deployed on `management2.corp.vshn.net`.

Commit message:

Add reasoning to how reporting is handled

docs/modules/ROOT/pages/explanations/metered_billing.adoc, after:

= Metered Billing
:page_audience: vshneer

include::partial$audience-hint.adoc[]

This document describes how Puppet Managed Services report data to Odoo for service billing based on the measured usage.

More information regarding the metered billing at VSHN can be found at https://docs.central.vshn.ch/metered-billing.html[docs.central.vshn.ch^].

== Summary

The metered usage is leveraging the existing PuppetDB to determine billed services and components. Puppet profiles instantiate a defined resource type https://git.vshn.net/vshn-puppet/puppet-billing[Billing^] which defines what unit and Odoo product ID should be used and to which sales order the usage of a specifc service should be reported.

The https://git.vshn.net/vshn-puppet/odoo-metered-billing-reporting[Puppet-Odoo metered billing reporting^] will periodically query the PuppetDB for all `Billing` resources and submit them to VSHN central's https://docs.central.vshn.ch/metered-billing-data-ingestion.html[usage data ingestion endpoint^]

=== Enable metered billing in a Puppet profile

To enable metered billing for a Puppet profile, that profile needs to define a billing resource:

[source,puppet]
--
profile_example (
    ...,
    Billing::Options  $billing_custom_options = {},
    Optional[Boolean] $billing_reporting = undef,
    Optional[String]  $billing_sales_order_id = undef,
    ...,
){

  # in the profile, only suppress reporting if it is set to false explicitly,
  # otherwise rely on the the global reporting configuration evaluated in the
  # billing define type
  if $billing_reporting or $billing_reporting =~ Undef {
    billing { "${trusted['certname']}-${title}":
      product_id     => 'managed-service-...',
      reporting      => $billing_reporting,
      sales_order_id => $billing_sales_order_id,
      *              => $billing_custom_options,
    }
  }

}
--

[NOTE]
====
- Implement all parameters as outlined above including their default values. This ensures an unified interface across all puppet profiles.
- Set the `product_id` to the corresponding `Metered Billing ID` of the product in https://central.vshn.ch/[Odoo]
====

=== Set billing information in Hiera

For a resource to be processed in the metered billing, it needs to know to what sales order it should be reported. The `sales_order_id` needs to be configured in hiera:

[source,yaml]
--
billing::sales_order_id: 'Sxxxxx'
--

Alternatively, if different profiles should report to different sales orders, the `sales_order_id` may be overridden on a per-profile basis:

[source,yaml]
--
billing::sales_order_id: 'Syyyyy'
profile_specialservice::billing_sales_order_id: 'Szzzzz'
--

[NOTE]
====
Check with https://handbook.vshn.ch/domain_sales_account_management.html[Sales & Account Management^] for the correct sales order to use for a specific project/service
====

=== Disable metered billing in Hiera

Metered billing can be disabled for a specific profile or for a specific server or project in hiera

[source,yaml]
--
# disable billing for all services
billing::reporting: false

# disable for a specific profile
profile_specialservice::billing_reporting: false
--

== Deployment

The reporting is deployed using the https://git.vshn.net/vshn-puppet/puppet-billing/-/blob/master/manifests/reporting.pp[billing::reporting^] profile, multiple instances (f.e. one per Odoo environment) can be deployed in parallel.
Currently the billing reporting is deployed on `management2.corp.vshn.net`.
