docs/modules/ROOT/pages/how-tos/restore_postgresql_burp.adoc, before:

= Restore PostgreSQL with BURP

== Backup

Dump destination directory: `/var/lib/postgresql-backup`

The postgresql-pre-backup script uses https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/app-pgdump.html[pg_dump] to export all PostgreSQL databases in a consistent data format before every BURP run, usually once a day.
The destination files are named after the database name.

The default dump format used is "custom", it may be overriden by DUMP_FORMAT in `/etc/default/postgresql-pre-backup`

Example file list:

[source,bash]
--
confluence.dump
postgres.dump
--

== Restore

Backups can be re-imported with the pg_restore command. The following commands should be seen as examples.
An actual restore procedure depends on the situation at hand (partial restore after accidental data removal or a full restore after catastrophic hardware failure).

NOTE: This will only restore data, but not roles. Roles are supposed to be configured via puppet/hieradata.

. Restore from BURP (see xref:how-tos/restore_from_backup.adoc[Restore Files from Backup] for details and more options):
+
[source,bash]
--
$ sudo burp -a r -d /tmp/restore -r ^/var/lib/postgresql-backup/
$ sudo chown -R postgres:postgres /tmp/restore
--

IMPORTANT: If the service runs on an encrypted disk, ensure you use a restore location that is on an encrypted disk as well.

. Load backup (potentially destructive!):
+
[source,bash]
--
$ sudo -u postgres pg_restore ~/restore/db.dump -d db
--

. Load backup into a different database (destructive!):
+
[source,bash]
--
$ sudo -u postgres pg_restore ~/restore/db.dump -d alternative_db --create --clean
--

== External links

* https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/backup-dump.html[Backup and restore in PostgreSQL documentation]
* https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/app-pgrestore.html[pg_restore command in PostgreSQL documentation]

Commit message:

VSHNOPS-3885 Add db renaming before restore
As an alternative

docs/modules/ROOT/pages/how-tos/restore_postgresql_burp.adoc, after:

= Restore PostgreSQL with BURP

== Backup

Dump destination directory: `/var/lib/postgresql-backup`

The postgresql-pre-backup script uses https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/app-pgdump.html[pg_dump] to export all PostgreSQL databases in a consistent data format before every BURP run, usually once a day.
The destination files are named after the database name.

The default dump format used is "custom", it may be overriden by DUMP_FORMAT in `/etc/default/postgresql-pre-backup`

Example file list:

[source,bash]
--
confluence.dump
postgres.dump
--

== Restore

Backups can be re-imported with the pg_restore command. The following commands should be seen as examples.
An actual restore procedure depends on the situation at hand (partial restore after accidental data removal or a full restore after catastrophic hardware failure).

NOTE: This will only restore data, but not roles. Roles are supposed to be configured via puppet/hieradata.

. Restore from BURP (see xref:how-tos/restore_from_backup.adoc[Restore Files from Backup] for details and more options):
+
[source,bash]
--
$ sudo burp -a r -d /tmp/restore -r ^/var/lib/postgresql-backup/
$ sudo chown -R postgres:postgres /tmp/restore
--

IMPORTANT: If the service runs on an encrypted disk, ensure you use a restore location that is on an encrypted disk as well.

. Load backup in existing database (potentially destructive!):
+
[source,bash]
--
$ sudo -u postgres pg_restore ~/restore/db.dump -d db
--

. Load backup into a different database (destructive!):
+
[source,bash]
--
$ sudo -u postgres pg_restore ~/restore/db.dump -d alternative_db --create --clean
--

. **Alternative** you can first rename the DB and later restore the dump into a new DB with the old name (destructive!):
+
[source,bash]
--
$ sudo -u postgres psql -c 'ALTER DATABASE db RENAME TO dbbak'
$ sudo -u postgres pg_restore ~/restore/db.dump -d db --create --clean
--

== External links

* https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/backup-dump.html[Backup and restore in PostgreSQL documentation]
* https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/app-pgrestore.html[pg_restore command in PostgreSQL documentation]
